SLEP015: Feature Names Propagation (#48)
scikit-learn/enhancement_proposals: slep015/proposal.rst

follows::

    pipe[:-1].get_feature_names_out()
    # ['cat__letter_a', 'cat__letter_b', 'cat__letter_c',
       'cat__pet_dog', 'cat__pet_snake', 'num__distance']

Note that ``get_feature_names_out`` does not require ``feature_names_in``
because the feature names was stored in the first step of the pipeline and
will be passed along each step. All other steps will be passed a
``feature_names_in`` from the output of ``get_feature_names_out`` from the
step before.

Enabling Functionality
######################

The following enhancements are **not** a part of this SLEP. These features are
made possible if this SLEP gets accepted.

1. Transformers in a pipeline may wish to have feature names passed in as
``X``. This can be enabled by adding a ``array_input`` parameter to
``Pipeline``::

    pipe = make_pipeline(ct, MyTransformer(), LogisticRegression(),
                         array_input='pandas')

In this case, the pipeline will construct a pandas DataFrame to be inputted
into ``MyTransformer`` and ``LogisticRegression``. The feature names
will be constructed by calling ``get_feature_names_out`` as data is passed

> through the ``Pipeline``.

Reviewer: This implies it's the pipeline doing it. Or do you mean a pandas DF is passed around as your PR?

Author: I am implying that Pipeline is doing this. I update the doc to make this point explicit. I also added more details on how this SLEP relates to ``array_out``.

Considerations
##############

> This SLEP requires all estimators to store ``feature_names_in_` for all

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This SLEP requires all estimators to store ``feature_names_in_`` for all
```

estimators, which will increase the size of the estimators. By default, a
``Pipeline`` will only store ``feature_names_in_`` in the first step and
the rest can be computed by slicing the pipeline at different steps. In other
words, the additional space used will be at a minimal because only the

> input feature names from the first step are stored.

Reviewer: Then are we storing feature names in each step or not? This paragraph is a bit confusing to me.

Reviewer: Also, slicing from the middle of the pipeline, would lose the feature names.

Reviewer 2: Or we need to implement a `__getitem__` to recreate `feature_names_in_` when `start` of the slice is not `0`?

Author: > Also, slicing from the middle of the pipeline, would lose the feature names.

We can make this work by constructing the ``feature_names_in_`` and attaching it to the new pipeline.

                 .get_feature_names(orig_cat_cols))

    feature_names = np.r_[cat_names, orig_num_cols]

The ``feature_names`` extracted above corresponds to the features directly
passed into ``LogisticRegression``. As demonstrated above, the process of
extracting ``feature_names`` requires knowing the order of the selected
categories in the ``ColumnTransformer``. Furthermore, if there is feature
selection in the pipeline, such as ``SelectKBest``, the ``get_support`` method
would need to be used to select column names that were selected.

Solution
########

This SLEP proposes adding the ``feature_names_in_`` attribute to all estimators
that will extract the feature names of ``X`` during ``fit``. This will also
be used for validation during non-``fit`` methods such as ``transform`` or
``predict``. If the ``X`` is not a recognized container, then
``feature_names_in_`` would be set to ``None``.

Secondly, this SLEP proposes adding ``get_feature_names_out(input_names=None)``
to all transformers. By default, the input features will be determined by the
``feature_names_in_`` attribute. The feature names of a pipeline can then be
easily extracted as follows::

>     pipe[:-1].get_feature_names_out()

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    pipe[-1].get_feature_names_out()
```

Reviewer: the last step of the pipeline only has input feature names, not output, unless it's a transformer.

Reviewer 3: ah right...

``get_feature_names_out`` method with additional tests to
``check_estimator``.

Alternatives
############

There have been many attempts to address this issue:

1. ``array_out`` in keyword parameter in ``transform`` : This approach requires
   third party estimators to unwrap and wrap array containers to in transform,
   which introduces more burden for third party estimator maintainers. This
   SLEP is easier to implement because it requires less changes. Furthermore,
   ``array_out`` with sparse data will introduce an overhead when being passed
   along in a ``Pipeline``.

2. [slep_007]_ : For ``SLEP007`` to function it still requires a mechanism to
   pass feature names through a pipeline such as ``array_out``.
   Furthermore, ``feature_names_out_`` would not be needed because it can be
   computed with ``get_feature_names_out``. The benefit of the
   ``get_feature_names_out`` method is that it can be used when the input names
   are not passed in ``fit``. This can happen in a pipeline when transformers
   output ndarrays or sparse matrices without names. With a
   ``feature_names_out_`` attribute, the estimator would require an array

>    container with feature names for ``feature_names_out_`` to be defined.

Author: I was trying to say that for a `Pipeline` the feature names are not passed through each step and a `get_feature_names_out` method can be used to get the names with slicing.

I updated proposal with this clarification.

3. [slep_012] : The ``InputArray`` was developed to work around the overhead
    of using a pandas ``DataFrame`` or an xarray ``DataArray``. The
    introduction of another data structure into the Python Data Ecosystem,

>     would be lead to more burden for third party estimator maintainers.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
    would lead to more burden for third party estimator maintainers.
```
Or "would have lead"?

transformer that created the feature. This interface can be cumbersome when used
together with a pipeline with multiple column names::

    X = pd.DataFrame({'letter': ['a', 'b', 'c'],
                      'pet': ['dog', 'snake', 'dog'],
                      'distance': [1, 2, 3]})
    y = [0, 0, 1]
    orig_cat_cols, orig_num_cols = ['letter', 'pet'], ['num']

    ct = ColumnTransformer(
        [('cat', OneHotEncoder(), orig_cat_cols),
         ('num', StandardScaler(), orig_num_cols)])
    pipe = make_pipeline(ct, LogisticRegression()).fit(X, y)

    cat_names = (pipe['columntransformer']
                 .named_transformers_['onehotencoder']
                 .get_feature_names(orig_cat_cols))

    feature_names = np.r_[cat_names, orig_num_cols]

The ``feature_names`` extracted above corresponds to the features directly
passed into ``LogisticRegression``. As demonstrated above, the process of
extracting ``feature_names`` requires knowing the order of the selected
categories in the ``ColumnTransformer``. Furthermore, if there is feature
selection in the pipeline, such as ``SelectKBest``, the ``get_support`` method

> would need to be used to select column names that were selected.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
would need to be used to infer the column names that were selected.
```

Solution
########

This SLEP proposes adding the ``feature_names_in_`` attribute to all estimators
that will extract the feature names of ``X`` during ``fit``. This will also
be used for validation during non-``fit`` methods such as ``transform`` or

> ``predict``. If the ``X`` is not a recognized container, then

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
``predict``. If the ``X`` is not a recognized container with columns, then
```

``feature_names_in_`` would be set to ``None``.

Secondly, this SLEP proposes adding ``get_feature_names_out(input_names=None)``
to all transformers. By default, the input features will be determined by the
``feature_names_in_`` attribute. The feature names of a pipeline can then be
easily extracted as follows::

    pipe[:-1].get_feature_names_out()
    # ['cat__letter_a', 'cat__letter_b', 'cat__letter_c',
       'cat__pet_dog', 'cat__pet_snake', 'num__distance']

Note that ``get_feature_names_out`` does not require ``input_names``
because the feature names was stored in the pipeline itself. These
features will be passed to each step's ``get_feature_names_out`` method to
obtain the output feature names of the ``Pipeline`` itself.

Enabling Functionality
######################

The following enhancements are **not** a part of this SLEP. These features are
made possible if this SLEP gets accepted.

1. As an alternative to slicing, we can add a

>    ``Pipeline.get_feature_names_in_at`` method to get the names at a specific

Reviewer 5: I find this name unpleasant, and don't see what's so much better than `Pipeline[-1].feature_names_in_`

Author: This will not work be default because the final step would not have the feature names if there is more than one step:

```py
pipe1 = make_pipeline(StandardScaler(), LogisticRegression())
# pipe1[-1].feature_names_in_ does not exist

pipe2 = make_pipeline(LogisticRegression())
# pipe2[-1].feature_names_in_ does exist
```

This proposal does not actually pass through the names at each step. Only the pipeline and the first step will have access to the input names.

I'll remove this point to make this SLEP shorter.

   step. This can be a simple alternative to slicing::

      pipe.get_feature_names_in_at(-1)

2. This SLEP enables us to implement an ``array_out`` keyword argument to
   all ``transform`` methods to specify the array container outputted by
   ``transform``. An implementation of ``array_out`` requires
   ``feature_names_in_`` to validate that the names in ``fit`` and

>    ``transform`` are consistent. With the implementation of ``array_out`` needs

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
   ``transform`` are consistent. An implementation of ``array_out`` needs
```

   a way to map from the input feature names to output feature names, which is
   provided by ``get_feature_names_out``.

3. An alternative to ``array_out``: Transformers in a pipeline may wish to have
   feature names passed in as ``X``. This can be enabled by adding a
   ``array_input`` parameter to ``Pipeline``::

        pipe = make_pipeline(ct, MyTransformer(), LogisticRegression(),
                             array_input='pandas')

   In this case, the pipeline will construct a pandas DataFrame to be inputted
   into ``MyTransformer`` and ``LogisticRegression``. The feature names
   will be constructed by calling ``get_feature_names_out`` as data is passed
   through the ``Pipeline``. This feature implies that ``Pipeline`` is
   doing the construction of the DataFrame.

Considerations
##############

1. The ``get_feature_names_out`` will be constructed using the name generation
   specification from :ref:`slep_007`.

> 2. For a ``Pipeline`` with only one estimator, slicing will not work and one

Reviewer 5: I find this confusing. You're saying slicing will not work, but then showing an example with slicing? Or are you distinguishing slicing from indexing. What does slicing have to do with anything anyway??

Author: I wanted to distinguish between the following two pipelines:

```py
pipe1 = make_pipeline(StandardScaler(), LogisticRegression())
pipe1[:-1].get_feature_names_out()  # this works

pipe2 = make_pipeline(LogisticRegression())
pipe2[:-1].get_feature_names_out()  # does not work
```

`pipe2[:-1]` fails because the slicing will produce a pipeline with no steps. Although, we can allow pipelines with no steps to get `pipe2[:-1].get_feature_names_out()` to work.

Reviewer 5: Okay, I agree this is a strange corner case, since it is the only way to construct a fitted empty Pipeline...

                             array_input='pandas')

   In this case, the pipeline will construct a pandas DataFrame to be inputted
   into ``MyTransformer`` and ``LogisticRegression``. The feature names
   will be constructed by calling ``get_feature_names_out`` as data is passed
   through the ``Pipeline``. This feature implies that ``Pipeline`` is
   doing the construction of the DataFrame.

Considerations and Limitations
##############################

1. The ``get_feature_names_out`` will be constructed using the name generation
   specification from :ref:`slep_007`.

2. For a ``Pipeline`` with only one estimator, slicing will not work and one
   would need to access the feature names directly::

      pipe1 = make_pipeline(StandardScaler(), LogisticRegression())
      pipe[:-1].feature_names_in_  # Works

      pipe2 = make_pipeline(LogisticRegression())
      pipe[:-1].feature_names_in_  # Does not work

   This is because `pipe2[:-1]` raises an error because it will result in
   a pipeline with no steps. We can work around this by allowing pipelines
   with no steps.

3. ``feature_names_in_`` can be any 1-D ``Sequence``, such as an list or

>    an ndarray.

Reviewer 5: It might be worth noting that this allowance can avoid unnecessary memory consumption/copies, with reduced implementation complexity, although it may reduce usability a bit.

   a pipeline with no steps. We can work around this by allowing pipelines
   with no steps.

> 3. ``feature_names_in_`` can be any 1-D ``Sequence``, such as an list or

Reviewer 5: But ndarray is not a sequence: https://github.com/numpy/numpy/issues/2776

Author: Maybe "Iterable that returns a string" would be enough.

In our discussions, I think we want to make sure the feature names are strings.

Reviewer 5: Hmm. We'd better accept Sequences and 1d array-likes whose elements are strings: pd.Index is not a sequence.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
3. ``feature_names_in_`` can be any 1d array-like of strings, such as an list or
```
